FILE: TNTET-Syllabus-CDP-Paper-1.pdf
====================================

--- Page 1 ---
Teachers Eligibility Test - Paper 1  
 
 
(i) Child Development and Pedagogy  
(Relevant to Age Group 6 - 11) 
 
Part (A): Child Development 
Unit-I: The Children’s Profile at the Beginning of Primary 
Education—Physical and Cognitive.  
Trends in physical growth—Hormonal influences on physical growth—
Development of neurons Symbolic thinking and limits of logic—Sensory 
motor stage-Pre operational stage-Language Development—Influence of 
home environment, attitude of family members on cognitive development 
of the child-Identity status and psychological well being. 
 
Unit-II: The Children’s Profile at the Beginning of Primary 
Education—Social and Emotional.  
Self concept and Social Awareness—Sibling relationships—Peer 
relationship and play—Self awareness— Cultural influence on self-concept-
corresponding stages of Erickson’s Psycho-social development Emotional 
development in a Social context af fection- sympathy-laughter-anger, 
sadness, fear-Parent-child relationship-Emotional well being emotion and 
health. 
 
Unit-III: Physical & Intellectual Development during Primary 
School Years (6 to 10 Years) 
Physical growth cycles-Body proportions-Muscles and fat-Capacity for 
attention and concentration-Select ive attention-Memory strategies-
processing speed and capacity-Thinking skills.  Cognitive development. 
Concrete operational stage-Piaget’s tasks-concept of intelligence as a 
mental ability. Development of mental/intellectual abilities. Intelligence 
tests-Creativity in primary school Children.

--- Page 2 ---
Unit-IV: Social and Emotional Development during Primary School 
Years (6 to 10 Years) 
Meaning of social development-social expectations-Children’s Friendships-
factors in friendship and choices of companions social acceptance-the 
desire to belong-peer grouping-Effects  of schooling on social, emotional, 
and cultural spheres-Pattern of emotional development-common 
emotional patterns-the role of matu ration and-learning in emotional 
development how children develop likes and dislikes to subjects, teachers, 
school, other students-emotional balance impact of media on emotional 
development. 
 
Unit-V: Moral Development during Primary School Years (6 to 10 
Years) 
Meaning of moral development-factors in moral training of children- 
Honesty-Generosity-Children’s heroes and ideals-Meaning of discipline- 
essentials of discipline-media and their influences on moral development. 
 
Part (B): Learning. 
Unit-I: Learning. 
Dynamic internal process-connecting old knowledge to new information-
language learning-acquiring learning habits-learning to adapt to diverse 
situations in life-Nature of learning-learning through interactions. 
 
Unit-II: Types, levels and approaches to Learning. 
 
Types of learning-Learning Hierarchy-signal learning stimulus-response 
learning-Motor and verbal chain lear ning-Multiple discriminations concept 
learning-Learning rules and problem-solving.  Learning Levels from 
imprint to intuition- examples of learning at different levels. Approaches- 
Behaviourist-cognitivist and constructivist. 
 
Unit-III: Concepts and constructs. 
Concepts and constructs-concept-forma tion-Use of materials activities, 
scheme pictures, real life experiences-construct mental representations of

--- Page 3 ---
external reality-connecting ideas generated by students due to exposure 
to peers, media and community-concept mapping. 
 
Unit-IV: Factors Contributing to Learning. 
Personal psychological, social, emotional factors and school related 
factors, Learning style; teaching strategies; media; technology; 
1. Teaching Learning Process 
2. Teacher’s personality traits. 
 
Unit-V: Constructivist Approach to Learning. 
Learners construct knowledge for themselves-constructing meaning is 
learning-focus on the learner not on the lesson taught- Personal and social 
construction of meaning-Learning to Learn making meaning Learning, a 
social activity-ZPD. 
 
Unit-VI: Learning and Knowledge 
Active learner-Nurturing learners’ active and creative activities children’s 
voices and experiences-integrating their experiences with School 
Knowledge-Right to learn-Physical and emotional security for learning.  
Conceptual development-continous process-All child ren capable of 
learning-important aspects of learning -various ways of learning-Cognitive 
readiness for learning-Learning in and outside the school-knowledge and 
understanding-recreating knowledge-manifesto for learning.